And welcome to the session
Optimal 2D Graphics,
which will conclude our evening.
So my name is Ralph Bruhner.
I manage Quartz 2D Graphics.
And here's the entertainment
for the coming hour.
So we will talk a bit about core graphics
architectural changes in Leopard.
We'll talk about how to
do performance tuning.
That's going to be a bit about power
consumption and why that matters.
And we also talk a bit about
color matching and then a bunch
of pointers to other places.
So first topic I have is 64-bit.
Essentially,
you heard that Leopard essentially has
all the frameworks in 64-bit available.
And as a core graphics client,
what 64-bit mainly gives you
is a really big address space.
And one of the things you can do with
that is to render to large bitmaps.
Now there's an interesting problem
that if you have really large bitmaps,
let's say more than half a
million pixels wide or tall,
that a single precision float is
actually not sufficient to describe
the coordinates accurately enough
to do anti-aliased rendering.
So to address that problem,
we introduce a CG float type in our API,
which replaces the previous version,
which was just a single precision float.
And CG float in a 32-bit process is a
single precision floating point number,
while in a 64-bit process,
it's a double precision
floating point number.
So not only can your
pointer address more memory,
the actual coordinates you use
can address the same memory.
That's essentially the idea.
So if your app is building
for a pre-Leopard OS,
just use float because it's
naturally forward compatible.
Excuse me.
So one point.
Somebody's talking behind me.
Okay.
So one point I would like to make
is about performance with 64-bit.
On PowerPC, 64-bit performance-wise
is pretty much a wash.
So your 32-bit application in
regards to CG will run about as
fast as the 64-bit application.
However, on Intel,
there's actually a performance gain.
And the main reason is on Intel 64-bit,
you have twice as many registers so that
the compiler can produce better code gen.
And you have slightly modernized ABI,
which makes function calls cheaper.
So we have measured up to 10%
speed improvement just going from
Intel 32-bit to Intel 64-bit by doing
things like rendering PDFs and so on.
So you might want to consider
going to 64-bit if that helps you.
But the summary of a 64-bit
is that it's pretty much a
non-event for core graphics.
Everything just continues
to work as you would expect.
And there is very little
work for you to do.
So the second topic I have is, well,
we made the bitmaps bigger by
having a bigger address space.
We also made the pixels deeper.
So before Leopard,
you had the ability to have a CG image,
which references 16-bit
per component images,
among the all other formats
that were supported.
In Leopard, you now also have the ability
to create a bitmap context that
renders into 16-bit per component.
And the main clients for these
kind of operations are scientific
visualization and pro photography
are using 16-bit a lot.
So now in Leopard you actually are
able to take a 16-bit image that comes
from a high-end camera and scale it,
render it into a 16-bit context
and not lose any fidelity there.
So now let me talk about
the bigger changes.
So every now and then we go and
essentially replace a subsystem
of the operating system with
kind of a new implementation.
And that's usually kind
of a disruptive change,
lots of bugs that come
out of these operations.
And what that does,
it kind of changes the performance
characteristics of that
subsystem in a more radical way.
And of course the hope is that all
the things that are going to be
important in the next five years get,
you know, performance gain.
Well,
we don't really want to break anything,
but everything that used to
work stays more or less the
same and nothing bad happens.
That's the hope.
Well, if chosen right,
this is kind of the gift
that keeps on giving.
And as an example,
I would like to point out Quartz Extreme.
So a long time ago, it was, well,
just after the discovery of FHIR.
But before that, you know,
invention of that wheel contraption,
we introduced Quartz Extreme in, well,
Jaguar 2002.
And the idea was to take
the software composite that
we had before and put that,
all the compositing work that
the Windows server is doing,
onto the graphics chip.
And well, it was so great that today they
even sell you ice cream extreme,
so that's kind of validation there.
I guess we will have to have a
MaxiBond product at one point.
So as an example, a year later,
I've introduced Expose.
And Expose kind of made use of the
ability that you have all these windows
as textures on the graphics card,
and now scaling them and moving
them around is much cheaper.
Well, two years later with Tiger we
introduced Dashboard and it kind
of uses the same capabilities.
So it now uses more translucency because,
well, it's kind of translucency is almost
free from the client's perspective.
And, well, having windows with arbitrary
shapes and complex alpha channels
and so on is just working.
And in LabBird,
we are kind of milking that
feature again with Spaces,
where we now have several
desktops full of windows,
and we can seamlessly move those around.
So with that,
I would like to ask Assana Fard up
on stage to give us a demo of Spaces.
So Spaces was designed to increase
your display real estate without
really discombobulating your desktop.
So I'll go over some of the
features we have and a little bit
about navigation and preferences.
So the general view is
great for arrangement.
You can pick your windows around,
you can reorganize them,
move them around.
Exposé works if you need
to see more of your spaces.
You can pick one, again,
move between spaces.
One of the nice things is you can pick
up an entire app and move it around.
You control click and we move it.
We actually snap the windows back to
where they used to be so you don't
have to rearrange again afterwards.
You can arrange the spaces themselves.
Just pick one up and put
it wherever you want to be.
I'm going to move this guy back there.
A little bit about navigation.
This is, of course,
a great mode to navigate.
Tap moves around your spaces.
Arrow keys work, so on and so forth.
And you can just unzoom to
wherever you want to be.
At your desktop view,
it would be nicer to
navigate a little bit faster.
So we have programmed the
arrow keys to spatially move
over your matrix of spaces.
Your modify key is programmable.
I have mine to control,
so control arrow just
moves around your spaces.
And similarly, your number keys work.
So if you know exactly
where your Xcode project is,
you just go control one.
Oops, it's not there.
It's right there.
Or four.
And you can just kind of
jump between the spaces.
Another way to actually invoke
a space switch or space change
is by dragging your window.
You just drag the window
to the other side.
I guess I'm not in the right place.
There we go.
Let's see.
Oops.
I guess my dragging doesn't
seem to be cooperating.
But anyways,
you could pick up a window and basically
move it to your space and see if
these guys work a little bit better.
There we go.
So we switch the space and
we bring the window with you.
And you can also actually
on that same note,
you can hold down your window
and just go somewhere else and
your window comes with you.
Now, a couple other things I want to
mention are about the preferences.
We have a preference
pane in Exposian Spaces.
And you can add rows and
add columns and remove them.
And of course,
everything as usual is live.
The other thing I wanted to mention is
if you remove a space with apps in it,
don't worry about cleaning it up.
We move everything over.
We always remove the right
column and the bottom row.
So we roll things up and
roll things over for you.
The other thing I wanted to
mention is this concept of binding
your application to Workspace,
which means at launch time or
every time you open a new window,
your application will open
in that particular space.
So you can do that a couple of ways.
You can either add an application.
Let's see, let's say I wanna add my,
gosh, let's say iChat.
You open it and then you can just
go in here and decide wherever
you wanna put your application,
Workspace 3.
The other way is by command
dragging out of your dock.
So here I wanna put my
Safari in Workspace 1.
and as we go, everything is there.
One of the things I wanted to mention is,
again, let me go back in this mode,
everything we do is live,
and our windows are alive,
and the apps are rendering,
and we're drawing, and everyone's happily
going about their business,
which is something that we can
do because of Course Extreme.
It really wouldn't have
been possible without it.
So with that,
I'd like to introduce Andrew Barnes,
who's going to talk about Course GL,
our next generation acceleration.
Andrew.
Thanks, Assana.
So what we're really going to talk about
at this part of the section is about
QuartzGL and just general optimizations
that you can do with your 2D graphics.
And as my title suggests,
I'm the person who makes
pixels show up on the screen.
So anyway,
let's just start right away because
we've got a fair amount of material.
You've seen this architecture
slide many times before.
Basically,
your applications draw either into
DRAM via the window backing store or
via surfaces with 3D or video content.
They all get mixed together
by the Quartz compositor and
displayed onto the frame buffer,
which gets scanned out to the display.
So obviously,
this session we're not going to
talk about 3D and video because
this is 2D graphics and Quartz.
The second thing we're not going
to talk about is Quickdraw.
So hopefully you went to the
Quickdraw session last year where
they basically told you to use Quartz.
So we're not going to
talk about that either.
What we are going to talk about
is a little bit about QuartzGL.
QuartzGL basically
draws into VRAM instead.
It's a very simple version of VRAM.
And everything happens like
you think it should happen.
So what's QuartzGL?
Well,
QuartzGL is an implementation on top
of OpenGL of the entire Quartz 2D API.
And its main goal is to
offload all the rendering onto
the GPU where it should be.
And as a side effect,
it also minimizes your DMA transfers
that you go back and forth between your
window backing stores and your GPU.
In addition to that,
it also allows you to have a
more efficient or more integrated
model when you're dealing
with a lot of the graphics.
So it's not just about rendering,
it's about rendering with other
hardware accelerated systems.
For instance, Core Animation, Core Image,
OpenGL.
Those stories slightly change as soon
as we start using the GPU all the time.
So yeah, we went off and did this.
We took some time to do it.
And we learned a bunch
of lessons along the way.
Basically, a lot of applications,
the majority of applications,
rendering is not the bottom line.
You do samples of applications and
they're spending time touching a disk
updating preferences and stuff like that.
So that's one thing we really did notice.
We also noticed that people
didn't use the Quartz 2D API.
They used the Quartz 2D
API in a very efficient way.
And that, unfortunately,
turns out to be a little bit
more costly for the GPU scenario.
And the third and last thing that we
did learn is that once you start doing
efficient programming using Quartz,
you can really fly.
So let's take a look
at some of the details.
So basically with a 2D guy,
you're drawing into your backing
store at system memory speeds,
and we do that at 5 gigabytes a second.
Once it's in DRAM,
the DRAM gets uploaded to
VRAM at 2 gigabytes a second.
With Quartz GL,
the formula change is slightly different.
You're actually packing command
buffers at 2 gigabytes a second,
which are much smaller than the
actual data that you're actually
blitting if you were to use Quartz 2D.
And your actual blitting speeds
are like 30 gigabytes a second.
So, you know, it's all really basically
about the bandwidth.
So here I had a scenario where basically,
you know, I wanted to show some numbers
of how fast it could be.
And this chart shows basically the
cycle of I want to draw a rectangle,
256 by 256 rectangle.
And then I want to tell the... I want
the Windows server to flush it.
We've put the Windows server
and everybody in benchmark mode,
so we try to minimize any kind
of blocking that you would see.
So in their example, in this example,
you see the MacBook Pro and the
Mac Pro using Quartz 2D would basically
start uploading huge amounts of data,
DMAing via the backing store,
whereas Quartz GL,
there's no backing store, so it's zero.
Command buffers in Quartz 2D,
they're smaller than with Quartz GL.
That's because we've translated
all of the hard work of that 3,300,
500, gigabytes a second into, you know,
16 megabytes per second, right?
So a lot of things has changed.
And as a side effect also,
you also end up using less CPU.
Quartz 2D uses a lot of CPU.
Quartz GL uses less because
all it has to do is pack quads.
And the grand total at the
end is basically a 2X for your
MacBook Pro and for your Mac Pro,
you know, 4X.
These numbers are obviously
pretty preliminary.
But basically, that's the bottom line.
Use QuartzGL,
you can get to the display faster.
So now we're actually starting
to look at the nitty gritty.
What we're trying to do is we're
trying to draw a bunch of images,
right?
Same size images, you know,
a whole range of images.
And we say, okay, great.
What we're going to do is we're
going to give you your application
100% of the CPU and what can
you get done in that time?
So obviously, as we can suspect,
the software just gets slower and
slower because you're actually just
ending up filling more and more memory.
Whereas in the hardware case, well,
it takes constant time to pack a quad.
And that's it.
So that's all great.
And I'm sure a lot of
surfer dudes out there,
developer surfer dudes
are probably thinking,
dude, you know, what are you thinking?
The GPU doesn't have infinite bandwidth.
How does this really work out?
You know,
I'm going to have to block some ways.
Well, that's kind of true.
You do have to block.
And for the software cases,
which is the yellow and red,
you see the usual curve.
You start going down.
But, you know, the GPU,
depending on how fast your GPU, i.e.
the faster GPU being the blue line,
it actually takes a constant time.
that it starts to end
up stalling on the GPU.
And the faster your GPU,
the more that line, like, let's say,
take the blue line,
would continue out and bulge over,
you know,
to overlap and become faster in software.
And then, of course,
some of you are actually
thinking and looking,
well, you know,
on the slightly less capable GPU,
it looks as if the GPU is
kind of slower than the CPU.
Well, that's... Sometimes that
can be unfortunate,
but it's not always true.
Here you have to look at
the other perspective.
The other perspective is that even
though you've consumed all this
time on your CPU and you're getting
more or less the same work done,
how much CPU are you consuming?
The software case consumes 100% of
the CPU in order to do those blitz,
whereas a hardware case,
it gets less and less.
So guess what?
Use QuartzGL and you get
back all your CPU again.
You can start going and touching the
disk and flying off and doing all the
strange things that you want to do.
So that's the advantage.
So now let's basically say
what's going to happen.
Enough with the silly benchmarks.
What's really going to
happen with my application?
Here we see a bunch of examples
of resizing because live resize is
probably a very taxing scenario,
and you will get good exercise
of your API by doing it.
So there's a bunch of scenarios
where you're resizing mail
and resizing text edit,
Xcode, scrolling, stuff like that,
and we're seeing pretty decent gains.
Personally, I'd like to see those
numbers a bit larger,
and probably they'll end up being
larger at the time Leopard ships.
But that's basically what happens.
Okay, so great.
That's one application.
Cool.
Let's add a little bit
more complicated scenarios.
Here I have a simple test where,
you know,
we got Atlantis spinning away at
800 frames per second or whatever,
and we got, you know,
four PDF documents all
scrolling with transparency.
We got a bunch of
different things going on,
and this is what this really looks like.
On your MacBook Pro,
you can see the DMAs are pretty large,
and you see your CPU usage
across all the board,
both with Quartz GL and Quartz
TD being pretty much constant time.
But guess what happens?
You're actually updating almost to,
you know, 1.5x, or 1.5x.
So you're actually
getting more frames out.
Of course, this is in benchmark mode,
of course.
And, you know, as you see, as usual,
the DMA command data slightly goes up,
but, you know,
but you get rid of all of that
backing store DMA going up also.
So that's good.
So now what we're going to do
is sort of move into little
practices that you can do to play
nice with Quartz GL and Quartz.
And these optimizations that I'm talking
about basically apply to both systems.
They're good.
Once you start practicing these,
using these tips,
you basically go a lot faster on
both the hardware and the software.
So let's start off
with some fundamentals.
Basically,
it doesn't matter what system you're on,
graphics system or otherwise,
minimizing your state changes
is always a good thing.
It basically amortizes the
cost of a state change with
respect to your operation.
So you can set your black color,
and then draw a whole
bunch of black text.
You set your blue color as
opposed to going ping pong,
ping pong.
The second thing that you also
need to consider is drawing less,
right?
I mean,
you guys know what is going to be shown,
what is going to be there.
So discarding things is a good thing.
Don't just say, oh,
I've got a scene of 50,000 things
and just draw it and expect
us to do really fast stuff.
And second thing, you know,
you always have to be very
cautious about memory consumption.
Memory consumption is a big thing.
And the point underneath there
is basically that every page
you make is potentially a page
that needs to be paged out.
So yes,
you developers might have two gigabytes
or four gigabytes in your system,
but for people, you know, your usual app,
your usual mom and pop shop,
it's going to be, you know, 512K,
512 meg.
So, you know,
you have to be cautious about
how much memory you consume.
And the second two
points are more global.
They're about knowing
what you're dealing with.
Are you dealing with lots of images,
small images?
You know, how complicated are the images?
Are they all, you know,
raw camera images, stuff like that?
You have to understand the type
of data that you're dealing with.
And the last point is, you know,
as usual software is an
evolutionary process and,
you know,
you shouldn't be afraid to evaluate
something today and move on to the next,
you know, because things have changed.
So.
First key goal, key point, key tenant,
key everything is reuse your objects.
You've heard this before.
Basically, your object refs are keys into
internal caches that CG uses.
You just have to hold
onto them and we will,
you know, end up,
if we need to draw something or color
match an image or any of those things,
we'll just do all the usual stuff.
And it, you know, you don't have to do
anything except hold onto it.
It also has a bonus point of
if you have an example of,
you know, 100 images that you're
trying to put in a PDF file,
there's actually only one image.
If you give us a new image ref,
we're just going to write out that image
100 times as opposed to just using one.
So, you know, in all those cases it,
you know, basically cuts down on overhead
and doing complicated work if
you hold onto these image refs.
So we can go back and look at, you know,
cached entries when you
give us the image ref again.
And, of course, using the tenant of,
you know, reserve your,
be cautious about your
memory consumption.
If you don't need something,
just let it go.
We'll delete all the
entries in the cache,
you know, so,
and you can reload it later on.
So now let's jump into the type
of objects that you're going to
be caching or potentially using
or which will give you a benefit.
Path refs.
Always use path refs.
Path refs are much faster than
constructing your path all
the time over and over again.
Just hold on to the path and use it.
The other thing about path refs is that
if we've already scan converted the data,
we already know that we don't
have to do this work again.
So you give us a path ref,
we translate to our cached entry,
bing bang, you go fast.
Last point about paths is that you
have to be cautious about using very,
very large, complicated paths.
If you have a path that consists
of many subpaths and the subpaths
are geometrically disjoint,
it might be more efficient
for you to render the disjoint
subpaths independently.
So watch out for that.
So lines and rectangles.
Like paths,
but we're going to concentrate
more on stroking lines and filling
rectangles because a lot of people
actually fall into that class.
They've got a CAD application or
they've got some wireframe thing.
Use this API.
It's much better.
It is the fastest way to draw lines
and rectangles on the display.
The second thing for those of you who do
would find this method more efficient,
you also have to be concerned
about what you're dealing with.
Are you dealing with massive wireframes?
Are you dealing with massive scenes?
Get rid of the objects
you don't need to draw.
Get rid of the objects that
are not going to be seen.
If you're standing at 60,000 feet,
you're not going to see a fire hydrant,
so don't draw it.
I mean, that's basically.
Other things, too,
you might want to reorganize your
data structures to maybe help you
on your way of deducing whether
or not you need to draw something.
Quad trees, octrees, they're all there.
They're known stuff.
You can look it up on the web.
You can Google it.
So, yeah,
there's lots of different algorithms
that people have been using.
The next thing is a little bit more
about trying to cut down what you draw.
You really, you know, as I said before,
you really don't want to
throw a whole bunch of stuff
at something thinking that,
"Oh, somebody's going to do all
this clipping." If you can
pre-clip ahead of time,
like for instance that text block,
you know that that text block is the
only thing that needs to be updated.
Then just, you know, draw the text.
Why bother, you know,
draw the whole diagram
with all the images?
So definitely if you have things,
you can do trivial
culling of your objects,
clipping of your objects,
all those things,
just trying to minimize what
you end up giving to us to draw.
The second thing that you want to also
do when it's with respect to minimize
clipping is that we have lots of
clipping primitives that you actually,
you can use, and you can use CG clipping
to do the clipping for you.
But as I said,
the less data you give us to clip,
if you know this stuff ahead of time,
you know, the better it is for everybody.
So that's all cool,
but what happens if you want to do
something a little bit more complicated?
You can't actually specify a clip path,
right?
You actually have per-pixel clipping.
Well, the method of doing this,
which dodges a whole bunch
of complicated clips,
even if you have complicated geometry,
as well as per-pixel clips,
you can use this method.
You basically create an alpha context,
and you draw what you want to draw,
which is going to be your clip.
That represents a stencil.
You take that stencil,
and you have two choices.
Either you can take an
image that you want to draw,
in this case it's a wood texture,
and you can mask the image,
or you can just set the
clip to be the clip,
you know, set, you know,
CG context clip to mask,
and that becomes,
that gets integrated with your clip.
And for a silly thing like that,
where I have a mask and a
texture and a little highlight,
we end up getting something
that looks like that.
Well, that's pretty cool for 2D.
Yeah, okay, great,
the ball doesn't actually,
the texture isn't actually
wrapping around the ball,
but you get my point.
So now, let's talk about things where,
which you can provide color.
Well, CG color refs,
always use CG color refs.
They're faster than actually saying,
CG context set RGB fill color, blah,
blah, blah.
Those color refs you can
use and reuse them again.
You hold on to them.
We know the color is there.
We don't have to rematch, et cetera,
et cetera.
One other point about it is, actually,
you should have a color ref,
but you should probably attempt to
use the color that is appropriate.
It's not always true that red, green,
and blue equals the actual gray.
There are lots of situations
where that is actually not true.
Pattern refs.
Pattern refs are much faster
than tiling drawing yourself.
You set up a pattern ref, and we go in,
we want to fill something
with your pattern ref,
we execute one tile,
and then we get that tile,
and we rasterize that tile,
color match it, put it in a cache,
and whenever you reuse that,
fill an object with that pattern,
we just use the cache to
entry and replicate it.
So it's always faster than,
just continually to draw, draw,
and over and over again.
Shadings.
Shadings are also another thing.
The star in the middle is a
shading from white to blue,
or a darker blue, and if you, you know,
it would be much better for
you to use shading APIs.
A single call, you just draw it,
instead of actually going and trying
to put those pixels one by one,
or creating some image or something.
So shading refs are good.
They're also a more efficient
representation in PDF and PostScript.
So, you know,
that's a big win for using shadings.
But more specifically,
about shadings and caching.
The shading isn't really the
entry that's actually cached.
It's your function.
Shadings are basically a
geometric transformation of
your function to your display.
So, yes,
if you hold onto your shading refs,
we'll keep and say, "Yes,
we've rendered this rendition before."
But what's really more important for
you to hold on is your function ref.
That function has to get sampled and
color matched to the correct color,
and then used.
If you hold onto your function refs,
and you reuse your function
refs across multiple shadings,
you get a benefit because you
more or less would be hitting
the cached entries all the time.
The last point on here is about alpha.
Yes, alpha can sometimes be consistent.
It can be considered to be
free in the hardware case,
but it's a little bit more
expensive in the software case.
You should try to, you know,
if you have situations where
you have a color and you're
trying to change the color,
do a gradient or something like that,
setting the alpha is a much,
much cheaper way of doing it.
You got your simple black color,
you're drawing a gradation, just say,
"Set alpha, set alpha, set alpha,
set alpha." And you'll get
the same effect without us
having to go through and,
you know,
get conniption fits about trying to match
colors and do all these different things.
So definitely, you know,
that's a little technique to do.
Similarly, you can do it for any object.
You can do it for any object, you know,
if you have a color that's alpha,
you draw an image,
it'll come out 50% shaded.
Okay,
so let's talk a little bit about images.
This is the other source of data, right?
Things you should know about images.
What are good component sizes?
Component sizes, well, bytes, shorts,
and floats.
Ralph did mention that we added
a new 16-bit bitmap context,
but what he also didn't
say that for Leopard,
we've actually increased
the actual pipelines.
The pipelines are now byte pipelines,
and they're also short
pipelines and float pipelines.
So once they go through,
they get color matched,
interpolated if you have a float image,
it gets color matched, interpolated,
masking,
everything happens all in floats.
So the final image that
comes out on the other end,
which you see in your bitmap context,
is the actual closest representation
to this source that you provided.
Other things that you should notice
about images is people always ask,
"Well,
what's a good bytes per row value?" Well,
you should probably use pixel multiples,
start there.
Vector multiples are also good.
Scanline alignment, that's also good,
too.
So you can pad things out or not.
Color spaces, if you don't know what
your color space is,
you should just use generic RGB.
Don't try and get funky on us.
And the second thing
about just let us do that,
and we'll do it for you with ease.
That's all we do.
Also, as I said,
avoid needless coercions of your data.
Don't coerce data from
gray to CMYK or whatever.
Just leave it as it is.
Tell us what the color space is
and we'll do all the hard work.
The last thing, point on the slide,
is about good image performance.
It's always good to use the destination
color space for best image performance.
We look at it, we say the source image
is this color space,
destination is this color space.
Oh, nothing needs to be done.
We can just blast that data
straight into the destination.
So, find your destination color
spaces and you'll go faster.
More about images,
what you should watch out for.
In Tiger, we actually introduced a new
constant for to handle little
Indian data versus big Indian data.
You really should use these cautiously.
Use it for what makes sense.
If you actually have some kind of pixel
loop running over your data and you're
looking at things in terms of words,
like 32-byte quantities, then yes,
turn on the flag.
But if you already have big Indian data,
meaning just red followed
by green followed by blue,
just leave it at that.
We'll do all the work.
The second thing you want to be
cautious about when you're dealing
with these constants is you want
to set up your byte order constant
sizes to be a multiple of row bytes.
You don't want a swap unit
that crosses a scan line.
That just causes us to do more work.
So, if you could just pad it out and say,
"Okay, great.
I've got something that's got to
be a multiple of 32 bits," then
just use that constant instead.
More about alpha.
Basically, alpha, anytime you have alpha,
you imply blending.
Blending basically cuts
your throughput in half,
no matter whether it's a GPU or a CPU.
You have to read the source,
read the destination, combine them,
and put them back in the destination,
as opposed to just an opaque copy.
So, watch out for alpha,
or use it sparingly.
Don't create images that have
FFF in the alpha channel.
Just say,
"Skip alpha," and we'll do the rest.
Premultiply.
That's also another one.
Premultiply when you need to.
If you need to premultiply,
do premultiply.
If you don't need to look at the data,
don't bother premultiplying for us.
We know how to do that.
It has performance penalties when
you're dealing with color matching.
Basically, we have to un-premultiply the
data in order to match it and
then apply it to the blitters.
So, if you have a problem
with color matching,
you can do that.
If you have a problem
with color matching,
you can do that.
If you have a problem
with color matching,
you can do that.
If you do it more than you need to,
it's going to be a little
bit more expensive.
Yes, okay, things are cached,
so you only do it once,
but avoid it when possible.
The last point is about
image interpolation.
Image interpolation is basically
used to control what you see,
how well it does its work.
You want to use it.
They have very different quality versus
speed performance characteristics,
and you should probably choose
the one that's appropriate.
High, medium, none, low, default.
All of those things.
You find them in the headers
and in the documentation.
So, okay, great.
We have images.
We told you what to do about
doing things with images.
Well, what happens if I'm bumping
into some scenario where I know
I'm going to blow CG's cache,
or I know I'm going to have
really complicated things?
You might want to consider caching.
Now, caching, you have to be very
cautious about caching,
right?
You have to make sure that you've
measured all the effects of your caching.
You don't want to have a situation
where you're allocating tons
and tons and tons of images,
and they're basically
hanging out in memory.
So, measure the performance,
measure the memory footprint,
and try to be,
if you're going to go down this path,
be committed to managing
your cache efficiently.
Don't say, I'm caching,
and then just call it a stash,
where you just create images
and keep them as memory,
expecting the system to
page out your memory.
Manage it effectively.
Things that aren't being used,
evict them.
One last point about using this
type of approach and managing
your own cache is that you can use
data providers to your advantage.
They somehow decouple.
You can do VM tricks and stuff like that,
where when you first get the draw,
you get the notification,
access the data provider,
you make the memory.
After the image is used,
you get a notification,
and you can basically tell the VM system
to kill those pages when appropriate,
make them volatile.
And somebody draws it again.
You go back, we see it,
you can use a VM trick and say,
"Have any of these pages been
evicted?" If the answer is no,
you've got the pointer.
There you go.
Otherwise,
you go and do your decompression.
So, if you guys have any of these,
you know,
want to get into any of these things,
come and talk to us in the lab.
We're going to be doing
a lot of work on that.
So, if you guys have any questions,
you can come to the
lab after the session,
and we'll be sure to help
you with these things.
The next source, images,
we're moving on to layers.
Layers are another source of data.
And they're basically device-dependent
representations of your drawing.
We really, really would like you to use
it for complicated drawing,
not for simple images.
Don't just create a layer and draw
an image into it and then use that.
If you draw the image,
the actual correct thing will happen.
We'll rasterize it,
put it in the correct form,
upload it to Texture,
and you just use that,
as opposed to using a layer,
because we have this memory,
and it's a hard allocation.
You tell us to allocate the stuff.
We have to keep it around.
So, definitely use it for
complicated drawings.
Also, layer rests are kind of
convenient because it hides
all the destination details,
right?
If you're looking at a bitmap context
that's floating point or a window
context that's a floating point window,
right, and you draw into it,
you ask the context for a layer,
you'll get back a layer that
appropriately matches that device.
Instead of you having to dick
around with trying to find out,
"Oh, is it a float component?
Is it reverse-Indian?"
What's the problem?
So,
just definitely use layer rests whenever
you have things like that to do.
The other last point about layers
I wanted to mention was that I've
bumped into a bunch of different
scenarios where developers are actually
creating layers that are really large.
They have this scene.
They're zooming in to, like, what,
10,000%, and automatically the spinning
beach ball of death comes up because
basically you've told us to allocate,
you know, two gigabytes of memory.
So, be cautious about what
you're actually doing.
In terms of when you use layers
and what you're allocating.
So, try to be cautious.
Memory consumption.
Always keep in your mind.
So the last point about
layers is that we've,
for Leopard, snapshot a sheet of acetate
where you can just pop a layer,
you draw it,
and then you can get the entire thing,
like let's say you call end,
and you can fade everything at 50% or
you can add a shadow style or whatever.
If you have situations like
that where you're actually
just drawing transient data,
you have one of two choices.
You create an off-screen layer,
you draw into it, and then you draw your
layer with your effect,
or you just say begin transparency layer,
draw your content,
and then end transparency layer,
then it gets composited as a destination.
So you want to try and look at those
APIs and use those APIs when that's
the type of scenario you're in.
One last point,
set your clip path before you
begin your transparency layer.
If you don't tell us what
you're going to draw,
we're just going to create a
layer the size of the destination.
So setting your clip path before
you begin your transparency layer.
the path restricts basically
how much data we actually make.
Okay, so now we've sort of looked at
all the different objects that
will help you go fast both in
the 2D and in the 3D environment,
or 2D and QuartzGL environment.
Now we're going to take a look at some
other meta-level type optimizations.
Drawing on pixel boundaries, you know,
sometimes they can give you good results.
You draw a rectangle,
you don't want the rectangle
to be on a fuzzy edge,
you want it to be a solid edge, you know,
a nice clean line.
You basically take your,
get the context's user space
to device space transform,
you get your array of points
or whatever rectangles.
You transform them to your device space,
and then you do whatever you want to do,
round them, seal them,
whatever you're fancy.
And then you inverse transform
them back to user space.
And those will be the coordinates
that if you use those coordinates,
they will actually end up
hitting the pixel cracks.
So that's how you get
to find these things.
Another thing that makes things
slightly more complicated is that,
you know, people normally think, one,
one user space point is equal
to one device space point.
With high DPI,
that's a very different scenario.
So as high DPI comes online,
you may want to do these things so
that you can get your things to snap
on grids close to each other without,
you know, having us do these partial
pixel coverage calculations.
So the second thing,
which is the last thing
about having demands,
library size.
Library size is probably the most taxing
thing your application can probably
do when it comes to user interfaces.
There's several scenarios where
you can try to give a user a better
experience during library size,
and one of the points is basically
consider periodic updates.
Periodic updates,
an example of that would be mail.
When you resize the mail,
the mail window,
what happens is they take a
snapshot of what's on the screen,
and they fill in all the exposed area,
and then when the user drops the mouse,
then they actually do the full layout,
right?
Text layout.
If you have a large document and
you're resizing the document,
yes, layout is expensive.
You might want to either cache
your layout or just hold on to
the current layout and wait until
the user releases the mouse.
An example of that would be text edit.
Really large documents in text edit,
instead of relaying out the
document at the new page size,
it basically takes a snapshot
or keeps the same layout.
Resize as you wish,
and then when you drop the mouse,
it does the full layout at the end.
Another example would be to
draw lower quality results.
Lower quality results
in some applications,
for instance, text edit and mail,
you don't want your text to look fuzzy.
But with preview,
preview is an example of using
lower quality results during resize.
When you live resize a preview window,
what actually happens is that
the image itself is being drawn
with a low quality result.
So we're just sort of giving the user,
oh, this is what it's going to look like
without actually doing the correct
color matching and calculation.
Well, not color matching,
but all of the extra work involved in
down sampling it to the exact right size.
When you release the mouse,
you see a clean version of
the image at that resolution.
Last point on here is even though
you do all these optimizations,
one killer is always blocking your
UI because you're touching the disk
or running off and doing something.
During a live resize session,
you probably don't want to
do those expensive things
like updating preferences.
You know,
and touching the disk and getting
network I/O and stuff like that.
So you defer that until the user
releases the mouse and says,
yes, this is what I want you to do.
So I'll say, how fast can I give the user
the feedback that they want from
the live resize without actually
doing really expensive work?
So that's what this is really about.
That was sort of like the
conclusion of the optimizations.
And now, probably thinking, well, geez,
how do I turn this thing on?
You can use course debug to turn it on,
or you can actually turn
it on on your application,
right?
One of the methods is to basically
put an entry into your info P list,
which says enable or disable.
You want to be explicitly sure
that that's what you want to do.
You want to either disable it,
or you want to enable it.
If you don't know what you want to do,
just leave it alone.
Don't put the entry.
The other method of getting
hardware acceleration is to use the
context set allows acceleration.
You can use it on a per context level,
but you have to be sort of cautious
about using multiple contexts,
because you can have one context
trying to draw something with
acceleration set to false,
and another context set
with acceleration to true.
What actually happens is that when
the acceleration false guy draws,
we basically say, oh,
somebody wants software
access to the bits.
We pull the data off of the GPU.
We pull the data back to the CPU,
and the application continues to draw.
At that point,
the window remains in that mode
until you do the next flush.
When you do the flush,
the data gets pulled back on the GPU,
and we use it.
So basically, that's why we took out
that quick draw thing,
because the moment you use quick draw,
you basically decelerate your window,
right?
Great.
So what I want you guys to do when you
go home or when you leave the session
is try and look at where the situations
are where you're not using the Quartz
API efficiently or optimally and see
if you can make improvements to try and
change it such that that's what happens.
You can use Quartz Debug to turn
it on or you can turn it on in your
application if you've done this stuff.
But basically the bottom line
is if you see an advantage,
yes, great, my application flies.
I get 30% more, 50% more live results.
I get 30% more live results.
If you see a scenario where
things aren't quite working out,
go in, dive into the details and say, oh,
yeah,
I forgot to hold on to my image refs.
I'm always uploading, stuff like that.
Go in, optimize your code, retest it,
try and find out whether
or not you can turn it on.
If you're in a lose situation,
just disable it and the software
guy would be just as good.
So,
and the last point basically is if you
don't see an advantage or a disadvantage,
just leave it alone.
Don't put an entry in it.
You know,
we might do something about that.
And also, don't forget to test on
various VRAM configurations.
Just because you have a machine that's
got two gig in it with 512 megabytes
of video RAM doesn't mean it's going to
run the same on something like a laptop.
So be cautious about the type
of considerations that you're
going to do when you say,
yes, I want to enable it.
So what I'm going to
do now is bring Ken up.
and Ken will talk about Quartz
compositing and co-release updates.
Yes, sure.
There we go.
Okay.
So as it says, I'm the guy to blame.
This was my idea and partly Andrew's.
So if this is causing you problems,
you can scream at me afterwards.
I'm not going to spend
a lot of time on it.
Andrew went over it in
gory detail last year.
But I want to make a couple of points.
Basic idea here is that the
Windows server for various performance,
power, pick a reason,
wants to limit the number of
updates that hit the display.
The user,
if you're on like a regular flat
panel and it's only 60 hertz,
that's how you're going
to get a lot of updates.
That's how fast the user can see stuff.
So if you've got some app
that's trying to pond away
and flush 400 times a second,
that's bad.
The user can't see it.
You're wasting resources,
wasting GPU power or CPU power,
wasting battery life, whatever.
So basically the Windows server will
try and coalesce as many updates
that happen in a single VBL period
down to just one single update.
So if you've got video playing
on one window and the little
spotlight icon is in the upper
right-hand corner flickering away,
those basically hit the screen together.
at the same time.
[Transcript missing]
Some stuff here.
So, these tools over here were
put in last year so that you
can basically see how your app
reacts under different scenarios.
So one of the things I'm going
to do is actually run Xbench.
So you run it in a normal scenario.
I'll just start and let
it fly through here.
This will take just a minute.
It looks like it's running pretty fast.
You know, no problems.
It's flying along.
I wish I could do just
lines or something.
By the way,
is the Xbench developer guy here?
Drag, okay.
So then we'll have the numbers here.
So, come on, one more test.
Okay, so not bad.
This is a 17-inch MacBook Pro.
Okay, numbers.
So, but what happens if
we turn off Beam Sync?
What kind of numbers do we get?
So I'll run this one more time.
And you can see now that there's
tearing going on up there.
I should be able to anyway.
And you can see that the numbers are
already popping out about twice as fast.
So you're like, well, wait a minute.
Like, what am I doing wrong?
And I know there was a
change made to XBench.
It was in one of the
release notes that said,
well, you know,
stick in a timer to basically deal
with this coalesced updates thing.
One of the things now
you can do is if you,
in Quartz debug,
if you force beam synchronization
on and request the good old,
you know,
see all the screen update flashing stuff,
Quit this, there's a bug I'm working
around here real quick.
Now, if you set up Quartz Debug
in this particular mode,
we'll flash the screen blue any time
the app basically tried to get a lock on
the backing store and couldn't because
coalesced updates were in the way.
We kind of do this little trick behind
the scenes and let you continue anyway.
But then that flush that
goes out will flash blue.
So that's a good way to tell you,
by the way, you're basically hitting
the Windows server limit.
You guys should be able to see all
the blue that's happening up there,
saying, hey, wait a minute,
you're trying to flush and coalesced
updates are slowing you down.
So this is something that
was added for Leopard.
You can try it out,
give us some feedback on it
and see if you like it or not.
The other interesting thing I'll
point out is there's been some
hubbub on the net on why are all
the Intel machines running so slow
when we do the UI test in XBench?
Well, it's hitting deferred updates.
If you leave it in the normal mode
because it got opted in and you run it,
it's just kind of do, do, do.
Not the--
[Transcript missing]
You can-- so I guess that the
summary from Ken's part is really,
if you're writing a benchmark
that measures drawing throughput,
make sure you don't
have a weight in there.
But waiting for VBL is kind of in play,
an implicit weight.
Okay, so let me talk about a
few remaining topics.
Power.
So when you think about optimization,
power consumption is usually not the
first thing that comes to your mind,
but I would like to just point it
out and make sure you remember.
So why you should care?
Well, the majority of Macs sold,
actually for the last few years,
are notebooks,
and most people in this room
have a portable computer,
and to all those people,
battery life matters.
Now, the good news is,
general performance optimization
is good for battery life,
too.
If you finish quicker, well,
you use less power.
So I would, however,
also like to point out that
QuartzGL actually has an advantage
in terms of power consumption.
So the numbers I'm
having here is scrolling.
In Safari,
I used the Slashdot website on a MacBook,
and I used the power meter,
essentially took the battery out
and used the power meter at the core
to measure how much power it pulls.
And the MacBook, when it's idle,
it pulls 16 watts.
And then, during the scrolling test,
without QuartzGL, it runs at 22 watts,
and with QuartzGL, it's 20 watts.
Now, 2 watts there,
that's about 10%, and you might think,
"Well, 10% isn't that impressive." Well,
10% on that MacBook is 25
minutes of battery life.
And so, this stuff matters.
And...
So if you have a
long-running application,
you might want to consider opting
into QuartzGL just for that reason.
Long-running application, I mean,
is something that draws a lot,
and typically it's something
that's in the background.
One example is you have a little
clock that you put on your desktop.
So the point is,
if you're building a clock,
you probably don't run
into responsiveness issues.
You know, however complex your clock is,
you probably are able to re-draw
the entire clock in a second that
you need to update secondhand.
However, if that clock needs 5% of
the CPU or 1% of the CPU,
it will make a difference
for laptop users.
So please keep that in mind.
The next topic I would like
to mention is color matching.
So a lot of images today get drawn to
the screen not tagged with a color space.
And what Core Graphics is doing,
it just says, well, if it's not tagged,
it's probably the display.
And you kind of get away with that
because most of the displays that
Apple sells are very consistent.
They all have very close
color characteristics.
But that is kind of changing.
So people today are
attaching a Mac Mini to a TV,
or you have third parties that
sell you wide gamut displays.
And if you draw untagged
images to these displays,
well, funny things happen.
Like if wide gamut displays,
all your colors are neon.
So make sure that when you draw images,
they're actually tagged with
some reasonable color space.
And as Andrew said,
if you can't really figure anything out,
generic RGB is a good choice because
at least it's consistent and it's
close to what your Mac display is.
And there's actually a new mode.
It's called the Quartz
debug that you can turn on.
And it will essentially mark
every image that gets drawn
that is not tagged in red.
So you can easily find out where in
your application you're doing that.
And yeah, if you're doing that,
you will find out quite a bit
of the Aqua UI is not tagged,
so that's going to
change by the ship time.
Okay, other changes.
So 256 colors and thousands of colors
modes for desktop use is going away.
So in Leopard, millions of colors only.
And for most of you,
that probably doesn't make
any difference because you
don't have dependencies there.
In fact,
it might reduce your testing burden
because you no longer have to test your
app in thousands and 256 colors of mode.
Those modes are still available if
you're actually using the display
APIs to change mode in full screen mode.
If you so desire and your game would like
to go full screen and run in 256 colors,
you can still do that,
even though I don't really
understand why you want to do that.
But for the desktop,
these modes are disabled.
And last, and probably least, quick draw.
So the message here, the API has been
deprecated for three years.
There is no 64-bit version of Quick Draw.
So if you want to compile
your application to 64-bit,
you will have to get off Quick Draw.
It's also not compatible with QuartzGL.
So as soon as a Quick Draw window
that is QuartzGL accelerated
gets drawn to with Quick Draw,
we have to pull that off the graphics
card because Quick Draw cannot send
its commands to the graphics card.
So this includes QuickTime clients.
QuickTime has a lot of old
APIs which use G-Worlds.
So you should use off those
and use QtKit instead.
You can visit session 220,
High Performance QuickTime Video Process
ing,
where they tell you a lot
about how to use QtKit.
Okay, with that I would like to
point out where to go next.
So there's the Graphics
and Imaging Evening Lab,
which starts at 6 today
to 10 in the evening.
And tomorrow there's the
Core Image Lab if you're interested in
how Core Image fits into Core Graphics.
And with that,
these are the contact information for
our 2D and 3D graphics evangelist,
Alan Schaffer, who will be...